Dear Ellie Vera Alba,

Congratulations on your wedding! I wasn’t there, but I wish I could have seen the grandeur myself. I saw pictures of your gown changes, the astronomical cakes, and all those people! My God! Five hundred guests treated to a launch of animatronic white doves in Low Earth Orbit arranged by an unknown foreign space agency. I didn’t know that service existed or if it’s even legal, but I guess your VP hubby Julio wanted only the best for his new bride.

I hear you’re a space enthusiast, what with all those visits at the Space Agency, so you should know all about climate change. Also, you’re only twenty-three, which is no excuse to be so out of touch with reality, so I hope you know that when you and your guests celebrated indoors, safe from the extreme heat outside, eating whatever kinds of fruity gourmet cakes and bastardized Filipino dishes your foreign celebrity chefs whipped up, at least eighty-five people had died from heat stroke. I assume you’re on an equally luxurious honeymoon right now, your hubby hasn’t reported to the office in two weeks. I hope your makeup stays fresh and you don’t get severely dehydrated and fatigued because of the climate. We wouldn’t want a potential miscarriage, do we? Alba juniors will grow up healthy and loved and become future Julio Albas, unlike all the other children with mothers who can’t afford even the most basic cooling services. Anyway, you are so #blessed.

Godspeed!

—Retrieved from ManongGuard.blog, “Open letter to Ellie Alba” published July 20, 2096, 7:00 AM with 230 notes

When Clara Villegas got invited to a party the night before the launch of the Datu I spacecraft—by none other than the President of the Philippine Space Agency—she thought it was, at best, an unavoidable formality. She hadn’t done anything to earn it, after all. She was up all night coding at the library and desperately trying to beat a deadline when she opened the email invite, got excited, and then three seconds later found out it wasn’t because of anything she did. Not really.

As a first-year aerospace engineering graduate student, she wasn’t allowed anywhere near the Philippine Space Academy’s restricted areas that housed all the good stuff—spacecraft simulation software, underwater spacewalk training centers, rooms with gravity manipulation tech. It meant a year of exclusively theory classes and no opportunities for recognition.

It wasn’t that she wasn’t wanted at the party, with all the esteemed board members and news-surveillance companies Gambit, Vision, and Phantom watching the Agency, and by extension, her. Almost everyone had assured her that it was an honor to meet the owner of the first Philippine dog in space.

Like everything these days, it had all been done before. In 1957, Russia strapped a stray mongrel named Laika in the Sputnik II spacecraft and flung her into space during the Cold War. Tomorrow, the Philippines will launch Datu I. The passenger—Clara’s dog Dakila, a twenty-eight-year-old golden Aspin who bore the family name a full year before Clara did.

It would be amazing, her parents had said, our own Dakila, the first Pinoy astronaut to chart the stars.

Daki was a Pinoy dog, Clara thought. Not really an astronaut. But on second thought, her parents weren’t wrong. Most Philippine Space Academy graduates with serious space ambitions went out of the country for further training, as there were no current domestic spaceflights planned, and they often stayed abroad for good. Whereas other countries had already been maintaining Mars colonies since 2035, the Philippines had only begun offsetting the lag when the Philippine Space Agency was established in 2090 and subsequently, the Philippine Space Academy in 2093, just three hundred meters away.

Clara had been told that Daki couldn’t come with her to the party, since she had to rest at the Agency the night before. Why they planned the party the night before launch was beyond her; she thought Daki would have loved to meet the other four-legged guests at the party that was clearly supposed to be hers.

Now, she had meant to spot anyone at the party who was around her age, but gave up, and downed exactly one mysterious fruity alcoholic beverage by nine. She wore a deep blue shift, black pumps, and gold crescent-shaped earrings—a college graduation gift from her parents back in 2092—and knew she was underdressed the moment she was ushered into the foyer by a reporter from Phantom with a black tie. He was probably the second youngest here and introduced himself as Manuel Santiago.

“So Clara, you must be sick of hearing this . . . ” said Manuel.

“Sick of . . . ?” Clara narrowed her gaze, focusing on a mole near his eye.

Manuel adjusted his glasses. “You know about Russia’s Laika, back in 1957?”

Clara knew where this was going. She always had the same answer, but it was always off-the-record, and Manuel could twist whatever she says. The Russian Sputnik II spacecraft wasn’t designed to be recovered, and Laika died of overheating hours after launch. They could all agree the ethics during the Cold War’s Space Race weren’t the best.

A week ago, Clara had been at the Agency’s microgravity simulator and had recorded Daki’s enthusiastic but muffled barking that leaked from the other side of the five-inch-thick glass pane. They fed her special dog food, and she even wore the official blue space suits the upperclassmen wore on training days. Compared to Laika, Daki had been acclimating for two months in more humane conditions.

“It’s 2096,” said Clara, clearing her throat. It would’ve been really simple to pick any dog for Datu I, even strays, but people at the Agency wanted a narrative to sell. Not just any ordinary dog, but the oldest dog they could find. A dog that defied all odds. “I studied their tech before committing to the project, and PSA’s Datu I specs are available online,” she said. “I think Daki is in very good hands.”

“Okay, off-the-record, what did they promise you? A full scholarship? A StarKeeper?” said Manuel.

“Owning a StarKeeper—very illegal. You know that, right? said Clara, “Or at least highly frowned upon. And the Academy’s tuition is subsidized based on need and merit.”

“So a full scholarship, then. For a twenty-eight-year-old Askal. What else do you know about StarKeepers?”

“Well, I know how it works, but I’ve never seen—.”

“I think you and I should go upstairs. You know, do some exploring. This party’s so dull.”

Clara looked at Manuel, raising an eyebrow.

“Why do you think I’m here?” said Manuel. ”I mean, no offense but, I’m not celebrating a no-show dog that’s unaware of her own planned suicide mission.”

“You’re not the partying type, I get it. You don’t have to ruin it for everyone else.” Clara meant to say she thought he was trying too hard to be edgy, but decided against it.

“Look—” Manuel sighed. “I’m sorry. But I’m here for the StarKeeper, and I know for a fact that there’s one upstairs; believe me, Phantom eyes are everywhere.” He gestured broadly, pointed at his glasses, “Follow me, I mean . . . If you want,” and held out a hand. But Clara walked straight past him and up the carpeted steps.

You think assassinating them will fix anything? All that money will be passed down to their children, and if you think for one second they might actually grow enough of a conscience to account for all that money then you’re absolutely delusional. Not a cent will go to your transportation budget, not your education, not even better cooling systems in this goddamn weather! It’s going to buy Marc So Jr.’s two-hundred-million-peso transatlantic penthouse and Jane Lopenas’ imported GoPro Space Lens! Obviously earned all that through hard work, didn’t they? Best-case scenario is they feel the tiniest bit of shame, but we know that’s not going to happen. They will have all that money and no fucks to give for you and your heat stroke death rate.

—Post from ManongGuard.blog on August 2, 2087 with 2 notes

The door opened with a click as Manuel finished tapping on a keypad beside the door. The StarKeeper in the middle of the room was immediately conspicuous.

“Do you know how much a StarKeeper costs? Not to mention the import fees.” Manuel muttered under his breath.

“It was donated to the Agency—” Clara fixated on the StarKeeper’s golden-silver sheen. Whoever designed it had the right idea, though it sat inside a secure glass display case where no one could use it.

“Right, why is it in the President’s private study then?” Manuel said.

“He . . . could have rented it?” said Clara.

“Sure he did.” Manuel shook his head. “That’s what two-point-one million American dollars looks like.”

Two months ago Clara read an article about Ellie Vera Alba’s engagement to VP Julio Alba. A StarKeeper was photographed along with Ellie’s pre-wedding preparations. Someone in the comments section had pointed it out, and soon enough, dozens of public figures had uploaded photos of a StarKeeper in the background, in their homes, at exclusive events, although everyone assumed it was an ordinary optical gadget, failing to notice the obscure logo. After some intense searching, Clara had stumbled upon a dated article in the Academy’s archives from 2035 and found out it was formerly called a Zoetrope, but Filipinos started calling it a StarKeeper, with some sources saying it was a namesake from the story, “Dead Stars” by Paz Márquez Benítez, of time-worn love and nostalgia.

“It really is something.” Clara skimmed her fingers gently over the cool, smooth surface of the display case that housed the StarKeeper’s body that sat atop a tripod. Someone like her or Manuel could bend low and look through the lenses, but as expected, there was nothing to see; you’d need a verified paid account to enable biometric recognition. What would Manuel want to do with a StarKeeper anyway? She’d snickered at the odd way he sat on the President’s chair, finding some specific angle to take a photo of the shiny gadget.

Clara had no intention of ever buying a StarKeeper, not that she had the money, but she found it a lot more interesting than her structural dynamics homework. On the surface, a StarKeeper looked like a fashionable antique, but underneath all that pretty metal was advanced software that captured 256K-resolution video indoors, owing to the surge in the use of full-spectrum surveillance cameras in public places. Plug in the time and date, and you could relive moments from the past that weren’t caught on film from 2034 onwards. For Ellie and Julio Alba, it was footage of their meet-cute back in 2090 at a show, uploaded as a part of their official wedding video series on YouTube for the entire country to swoon over.

Clara had waded through enough blogs detailing the Albas’ excesses, and this one blog that tended to go off the rails said that StarKeeper footage couldn’t be tampered with, something with primitive but robust fake-proof technology, an application of an offshoot bill passed from the fake news era, when people could falsify almost anything from pictures to voices and eventually, videos, enabling people to pin crimes on those couldn’t defend themselves or didn’t have enough clout to be believed.

Clara had only been on a plane thrice. Once, when she went off to college, and the time when she’d gone home for a mini-vacation in the middle of her master’s degree when Daki was twenty-four, then went back after two weeks. The first time, she’d anticipated the flight’s takeoff like it was her own death. The heady rush, the near-constant stomach drop—all of it seemed so far away. It was two in the afternoon, and she couldn’t imagine what it felt like for Daki; her vitals displayed on the Agency’s floor-to-ceiling monitor screen, heart rate spiking abnormally as Datu I ascended like lightning shooting up skyward.

“Vision News thinks the dog will survive.” An Agency employee had been perusing social media and news websites since launch.

“And?” said the President.

“And . . . Phantom says otherwise. At least three animal rights groups are suing after the launch.”

“What the hell do they know?”

“Sir, they’ve got people all over social media spreading complaints and—”

“You think they’re a threat?” The President scoffed. “They’re all so . . . loud and angry, that’s it. What have they really done?”

It took all of six hours after the launch. A bright flash on the monitor screen, then all Datu I live feeds abruptly replaced by a static whimper. Up until then, Datu I had been on a fixed route, stabilizing on the planned course almost perfectly; Daki with regular vitals and breathing steadily. Amidst the growing flurry of panic at the Agency, Clara could only remember the pain in her chest and the screaming that followed.

“That Gambit footage is fake. We can’t fucking trust anybody.” The Agency’s head technician cut through loudly enough that the mass hysteria inside had leveled off to anxious breathing.

“Somebody’s trying to sabotage us,” a woman agreed.

“How can you say that?” One of the younger Agency board members piped up. “Rewind that clip. See, Datu I goes offline right there, assumed destroyed, and the time stamps check out.”

Gambit, a small, privately-owned news and surveillance company had just published an exclusive video three minutes after the Agency’s feeds went dark—footage from one of their far-reaching satellites showing the eerily silent explosion of Datu I, watched by over a million people since its release.

“Look man, have you been living under a rock? People can fake anything, even video. Believe what you will, but we need verification, which could take days, even weeks.”

“What is it you really want Clara? You don’t care about Dakila, else why’d you let him go? Forget it. The Agency doesn’t have funds to launch another spacecraft or even a drone. And if the Academy did have some working spare, they’re wasting their time.”

Everyone stared at the Space Agency’s President, then at Clara, who just lost all respect for the man but didn’t dare show it in a room full of armed people. She had just suggested borrowing a spacecraft. Even a prototype, as she’d heard last year that the Academy had been restoring donated equipment. She was willing to bet it wasn’t old space suits.

“Sir, the American Space Agency is willing to donate one of their own,” someone echoed in the silent, tense room full of Agency employees.

“And for what? The dog will be dead by then.”

Clara had had enough. “Sir, that might be true. I didn’t go into this expecting no risks. I had faith in your technology, but we really don’t know anything aside from what Gambit’s footage showed us. If you could please consider that the footage might have been faked—”

“There is no progress, if we don’t accept the risks of failure,” the President spoke slowly, “There’s nothing we can do about it anymore, and we all share this burden. I’m sorry for your loss, Clara, I really am. I’ll be issuing a statement tomorrow—”

Clara bolted through the doors before he could finish.

Here’s the thing about StarKeepers that nobody else knew but Clara and possibly that reporter Manuel from the party or anyone who’d dug up everything that was to know about StarKeeper technology: with enough talent, someone could intercept the data cloud, edit the footage, and put it back without so much as a blip.

But someone with enough talent could not have foreseen the failsafe, either out of sheer arrogance or ignorance. That failsafe extended to similar StarKeeper technology being used for satellites and drones. So, if you had the gall to prick holes hoping to rupture truth, the footage would bleed, and bleed it would, with TAMPERED in every single line of the video’s decrypted data file on the blockchain, just waiting to be staunched. The decryption process would take about a month, and Clara did not have that luxury. Not now. She’d find out in a month.

But she’d already chosen to go out blind. For Daki.

Clara crouched after she’d heard shuffling from a faraway source above. It was two in the morning, six hours after launch, and someone was here at the Space Academy. Her heart was racing. Daki was out there alone and hurting, and she had managed to get this far without being caught, dodging all the cameras and trying all the lock codes she’d pilfered from upperclassmen. She’d turned towards the last corridor leading to the Academy’s hangar, looked up at the elevated glass platform and then as if she’d been incapacitated by the revelation, only managed to stifle a gasp.

“Manuel? You work security now?” Clara half-shouted, despite herself. “At the fucking Academy.”

“I moonlight every now and then. Night shifts. People can have more than one job, if you can believe it.”

Clara sprinted up the platform. “Let me in. Now.”

“Do you have a permit?” Manuel shouted.

Clara put up a shushing finger. “I need to get on a spacecraft. I know the Academy has one somewhere, even if the Agency likes to pretend we don’t.”

“So you can get your dog?”

“Just let me in.”

“Door’s not locked,” said Manuel.

Clara turned the knob. The ease of sneaking into the Academy, her being unnoticed until then, unnerved her. If it was this easy to get inside, with surveillance and all, why didn’t they care? She pushed the thought away. “So you don’t think Daki’s dead?”

“I know he isn’t,” said Manuel. She looked at him earnestly.

“Because you don’t think he is.” Manuel continued. “Why risk dying horribly in space? Unless you actually want to be a martyr.”

“Trust me, I don’t want to die, but I saw something on Gambit’s footage that’s pretty much proof that Datu I’s crash was faked.” A white lie, but close enough.

“What did you see?”

“No time to explain but it involves an advanced StarKeeper failsafe.”

“Rookie mistake, Gambit. Let me guess, ‘TAMPERED?’”

“Exactly that.” At least someone understood; she’d have to explain to everyone when she got back, test the footage, but if she couldn’t . . . Well.

“Is there any way you can launch me without notifying anyone?”

“If I can disable the cameras and the alarms that would be a yes. But I need you to pretend you work here. Wear my uniform and—”

“And get on a spacecraft, like Datu I.”

“Yes and no, it’s the older prototype unfortunately, but still fully functional, a restored one from China. It was built for a human driver. If anyone sees you, tell them it’s maintenance. The ship’s all the way to the last row with the scratched off paint, it’s the one that looks the most beat.” Clara shot him a look. “I mean, relatively.”

Manuel had handed Clara his uniform. “Now go. Hurry.”

“Thank you,” said Clara. “Really.” She had just spotted the small ship beside some rows of metal and half-finished space drones.

“Godspeed, Clara. Bring her home.”

The moment Clara had spotted the Datu I spacecraft just a few meters away, she felt like she could drag her own spacecraft towards it in a flash, cross the walkway tunnel bridge that connected hers to Datu I’s smaller entrance, and grab hold of Daki.

I will never let this happen to you again. I’m sorry. I’m sorry. Let’s go home.

She had just been talking with Manuel over her ship’s transmitter, telling him about Datu I’s numerous dents, how likely it was that a shower of space rocks had damaged its comm systems, but still, Datu I didn’t look too bad. Daki’s alive. I was right. Through tears and holding Daki’s weakened and semi-unconscious body, she’d repeated, I was fucking right. Let’s go h—

The one thing you never expect is another complication.

A breach in the aft, as sudden as time could allow in space, had sounded off the alarms. A space object had crashed into the ship’s tail, and the transmitter stopped working. The ship, barreling through space, had caused Carla to drop Daki; the world around her, warping and rolling as she tried to hinge her weight on anything she could grab to balance herself.

Daki was unconscious, but still breathing. In the stillness, she could not see why, in all possible scenarios, that this was it. This wasn’t how it was supposed to be.

The ship was offline, slowly leaking oxygen and pressure, and it had lurched in suspended space for God knows how long. Clara had been staring at the cracked window holding Daki close until a curious white bug seemed to creep slowly on the other side. She tapped the window, finding that her vision had hazed over the defined sharp lines. She squinted hard, realized it wasn’t a bug, but a large white ship in the distance.

On its side, emblazoned were large black letters:

Aba

Clara had seen those markings before, way back in college when her friends scribbled their names in Baybayin script. A Philippine spacecraft stranded in space? Clara hadn’t heard of any recent launches, and a ship as big as that would have permeated everyone’s small talk, the news, and social media. How was this possible?

The first character was for “A,” and the second one, “Ba.”

A-ba. Clara thought—Aba.

Alba.

Clara had been entrusted with a secret: somewhere on that Alba ship were people who got government authorization and had eluded the media’s surveilling and prying eyes, a rare feat in this age of transparency and accountability to the public interest. Could it be that the Agency had procured the ship, selling the public asset for some unknown amount of profit to the private sector? The Philippines had not even passed a Commercial Space Launch Act, making the ship’s existence illegal and unregulated. This required an investigation, and who knows if they’d undertake one if no one found out? Clara allowed herself to say this is no accident I’m here as she mustered enough bravery to hold Daki close and communicate in every way she could, that she wasn’t abandoning her, but that she’s going home alone, her injuries requiring urgent care Clara placed Daki’s unconscious form on a makeshift bed near the ship’s navigation display, and after some struggle, managed to steer the ship near Datu I, which had weathered less damage. She managed to salvage its autopilot function, made sure there was still enough fuel, and transferred Daki, strapping him to the ship’s chair, holding it in place.

We’ll see each other soon. Clara watched Datu I shrink farther from her line of sight.

Among the things she brought with her to the Alba were a 20% oxygen supply, and her space suit, which had taken a beating, but was still functional. Clara had seen worse in special elective classes where they studied foreign experiments that involved humans in space, so whatever was inside this ship would not faze her anymore, she hoped.

In one of those classes, Clara learned that the human body would not decompose normally if there wasn’t any oxygen, but slowly freeze. Presumably, the oxygen in the air could have caused the partial decomposition of Ellie and Julio Alba, whose well-preserved bodies hung in suspension. It had to be weeks since it happened. They hadn’t been wearing normal space suits. Instead, the couple had enjoyed a bulk-less, zero gravity honeymoon until larger space rocks had pummeled the namesake ship’s hull, as evidenced by the holes she couldn’t see from her previous ship’s window’s vantage. Clara heaved the two bodies on the circular couple bed in the ship’s master suite, tying them up with their own linens she found inside the drawers to keep them from floating away.

Clara was relieved to find that the ship’s communication systems still worked, and she’d contacted the Academy, willing herself to stay calm.

She didn’t say anything about the bodies. Her own oxygen was at 13%, and about six hours had passed since she’d sent Daki back home on Datu I, and all she planned to say was, “Is Daki safe?” And when the Agency rep answered in the affirmative, telling her that people back home were calling her all variations of brave and heroic, all she said was, “I’ll be out here for a bit for repairs, tell them I’ve got an even bigger story.”